Total pages: 16

===== PAGE 1 =====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026 5004816
FAD-Net: Unsupervised Frequency-Aware Diﬀusion
Network for Optical Coherence Tomography
Speckle Reduction
Yi-Peng Liu
 , Member, IEEE, Lei Wang
 , Jing Li
 , Yilong Zhang
 , Member, IEEE,
Haixia Wang
 , Member, IEEE, and Yan Liu
Abstract—Optical coherence tomography (OCT) is a non-
invasive imaging technology based on the principle of low-
coherence light interference. OCT is widely applied in biomedical
imaging and biometrics. However, in OCT imaging, speckle noise
arises from the coherent interference of light waves scattered
by microscopic random structures in biological tissues, thereby
interfering with the accuracy of biological tissues measurement.
Existing denoising methods suﬀer from issues such as high
cost, unsatisfactory performance, or heavy reliance on large
amounts of paired data. To address these challenges, the cur-
rent study proposes an unsupervised frequency-aware denoising
network, FAD-Net, featuring two key innovations. First, the
network combines the frequency-domain decomposition capa-
bility of the wavelet transform with the progressive denoising
mechanism of the diﬀusion model. Noisy OCT images are
decomposed into low-frequency global components and high-
frequency detail components via a discrete wavelet transform
(DWT), and a multiscale convolutional module with hierarchical
contraction characteristics is used to extract high-frequency
subband features, dynamically guiding the denoising process of
the diﬀusion model as conditional signals. Second, a structural
feature extractor (SFE) based on contrastive predictive coding
is designed to leverage the self-similarity of OCT images. Cross-
spatial relationships are established via contrastive learning by
minimizing the feature distances of related image patches and
maximizing those of unrelated ones, with optimization achieved
via triplet contrastive loss based on InfoNCE loss. Tests on public
fundus datasets (i.e., the DUKE17 and DUKE28 datasets) and
a self-built OCT ﬁngerprint dataset demonstrate that FAD-Net
outperforms current unpaired methods both qualitatively and
quantitatively, thus demonstrating the robustness of the model
Received 4 November 2025; revised 18 January 2026; accepted 5 February
2026. Date of publication 23 February 2026; date of current version 5 March
2026. This work was supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62376251, Grant 62076220, and Grant 62271481; in
part by the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant LD24F020005 and Grant LR24F030003; in part by the Fundamental
Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant D5000250364; and
in part by the Medical Health Science and Technology Project of Zhejiang
Province under Grant 2024KY881. The Associate Editor coordinating the
review process was Dr. Jing Lei. (Corresponding author: Jing Li.)
Yi-Peng Liu is with the School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytech-
nical University, Xi’an 710072, China (e-mail: liu
yipeng@126.com).
Lei Wang, Yilong Zhang, and Haixia Wang are with the College
of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Tech-
nology, Hangzhou 310023, China (e-mail: 221123120148@zjut.edu.cn;
zhangyilong@zjut.edu.cn; hxwang@zjut.edu.cn).
Jing Li is with the Department of Pharmacology, School of Phar-
macy, Air Force Medical University, Xi’an 710032, China (e-mail:
lijing.td@aliyun.com).
Yan Liu is with the College of Computer and Automation Engi-
neering, Northeast Forestry University, Harbin 150040, China (e-mail:
yan.liu@nefu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TIM.2026.3667230
across diverse datasets. The source code and pretrained models
will be publicly available at https://github.com/turturing/FAD-Net
Index Terms—Diﬀusion model, optical coherence tomography
(OCT), speckle reduction.
I. I NTRODUCTION
O
PTICAL coherence tomography (OCT) has emerged as a
powerful noninvasive, high-resolution imaging
technique that provides cross-sectional visualization
of biological tissues with micrometer-scale precision.
Leveraging low-coherence interferometry, OCT captures
internal structural information by measuring the backscattered
light from diﬀerent tissue layers, enabling real-time, in vivo
imaging without the use of ionizing radiation. This unique
combination of high spatial resolution, noninvasiveness, and
depth penetration makes OCT an invaluable tool across
diverse ﬁelds, particularly in medical diagnostics [1] and
biometric applications [2], [3].
In medicine, OCT is extensively used for retinal imaging,
dermatological assessments, and cardiovascular diagnostics
supporting early disease detection and treatment monitoring. In
biometrics, its ability to visualize subsurface tissue structures
enables advanced identiﬁcation systems with higher security
and accuracy than does traditional surface-level imaging [4].
To explore subsurface biometric features, we developed a cus-
tom OCT instrument for high-resolution imaging of ﬁngertip
skin tissues [5], as shown in Fig. 1. Our system is optimized
to extract detailed subsurface characteristics, including latent
ﬁngerprints [6], [7], sweat glands [8], [9], and sweat pores
[10], which are crucial for reliable biometric authentication
and forged sample detection. By capturing the intricate 3-D
architecture of these internal features, our OCT-based
approach enables more robust identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation
processes, thus eﬀectively addressing the limitations of con-
ventional surface-based biometric techniques [11].
However, a signiﬁcant challenge in OCT imaging is the
presence of speckle noise, which is an inherent phenomenon
arising from the coherent nature of the imaging light source
[12], [13]. Speckle noise manifests as random intensity ﬂuctu-
ations in the OCT images, obscuring ﬁne tissue structures and
degrading the accuracy of quantitative measurements. It can
also lead to misinterpretation of tissue morphology, resulting
in false positives or negatives during sample identiﬁcation.
Moreover, it hinders the precise quantiﬁcation of key structural
1557-9662 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: China Jiliang University. Downloaded on May 10,2026 at 01:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
5004816 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026
Fig. 1. OCT system designed for 3-D ﬁngerprint scanning.
parameters, such as the size and distribution of sweat glands,
which are essential for reliable biometric analysis. Therefore,
eﬀective suppression of speckle noise is critical for enhancing
the quality and reliability of OCT images, thus enabling accu-
rate extraction and analysis of subsurface biometric features.
Traditional OCT denoising methods can be broadly cate-
gorized into three types: spatial ﬁltering methods, transform-
domain methods, and model-based methods [14], [15].
Compared with deep-learning-based methods, traditional
methods often use ﬁxed ﬁltering kernels or transformation
bases, which lack adaptability to the complex and diverse
characteristics of OCT images. Moreover, they typically make
assumptions about the statistical properties of noise, and their
performance degrades signiﬁcantly when these assumptions
do not hold in real-world scenarios. Deep learning has led
to breakthroughs in speckle suppression for OCT images
[16]. The trimmed denoising convolutional neural network
(DnCNN) [17] and generative adversarial network (GAN) [18]
are applied to denoise retinal OCT images. However, these
methods rely heavily on many noisy-clean image pairs, and
obtaining high-quality clean OCT images is challenging in
practice.
Recently, diﬀusion models have injected new vitality into
image processing by cleverly leveraging the prior information
of the data distribution without the need for a large amount of
supervised data [19], [20]. By gradually reversing the diﬀusion
process, diﬀusion models can eﬀectively remove noise from
OCT images, thereby oﬀering an alternative for improving the
quality of OCT images and improving the accuracy of medical
diagnosis and research. However, these methods overlook the
characteristics of OCT images in the high-frequency domain
[21]. From a 1-D frequency perspective, spectral domain OCT
(SD-OCT) is physically measured in the spectral domain and
reconstructed in the spatial domain. Ignoring the frequency
information can lead to the loss of key frequency components
along the axial direction during reconstruction, causing a
deviation between the reconstructed image and the actual
situation, making the accurate restoration of the ﬁne structures
of tissues impossible [21]. Research has proven that neural
networks are not adept at ﬁtting high-frequency information
[22], [23].
To address the scarcity of clean labels and the neglect of
high-frequency information, we propose a frequency-aware
diﬀusion network (FAD-Net) for OCT speckle reduction.
FAD-Net integrates wavelet-based frequency decomposition
with an unsupervised diﬀusion framework. Speciﬁcally, the
discrete wavelet transform (DWT) is used to extract multi-
scale high-frequency subbands, which are dynamically fused
into the diﬀusion process via a time-aware weight generator
(TAWG). This mechanism enables the model to emphasize
high-frequency detail preservation in early diﬀusion steps and
enhance structural continuity in later stages. The proposed
method is validated on two public OCT datasets and a
self-built OCT ﬁngerprint dataset, demonstrating its strong
generalization and noise suppression ability.
The main contributions of our study are summarized as
follows.
1) We propose FAD-Net, an unsupervised diﬀusion-based
framework designed for OCT speckle reduction without
the need for paired training data.
2) We introduce a frequency-domain decomposition strat-
egy that decouples low- and high-frequency information,
guided by a TAWG to improve high-frequency feature
learning.
3) We incorporate a contrastive predictive coding-based
structural feature extractor (SFE) to leverage spatial self-
similarity and improve global feature consistency.
4) Without the constraint of paired data, we synchronously
verify the eﬀectiveness on the OCT fundus and ﬁnger-
print data. Through the dual veriﬁcation of quantitative
indicators and visual ﬁdelity, the generalize ability of
the method for heterogeneous OCT imaging devices is
established.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
Sections II and III introduce related works and our proposed
method, respectively. The experimental results are discussed
in Section IV. Section V presents the conclusion.
II. R ELATED WORKS
A. Unsupervised OCT Image Speckle Reduction
Compared with traditional speckle reduction methods, deep
learning-based OCT speckle reduction methods have achieved
good results in preserving structures and edge details. How-
ever, most methods often require many noise-free clean OCT
images as labels. The method of obtaining many ground-
truth images via multiframe averaging is usually complex
and time consuming, which is not conducive to the pop-
ularization of speckle reduction methods. Therefore, some
researchers have proposed OCT speckle reduction methods
Authorized licensed use limited to: China Jiliang University. Downloaded on May 10,2026 at 01:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
LIU et al.: FAD-Net: UNSUPERVISED FAD-Net FOR OCT SPECKLE REDUCTION 5004816
that do not require clean-noise image pairs. By using a 1:3
ratio of paired-unpaired data, Su et al. [24] designed an
asymmetric encoder–decoder and reduced the dependence on
paired data, achieving performance close to that of fully
supervised learning. Noise2Noise (N2N) [25] proves from a
statistical perspective that when no clean data are needed, only
paired noisy images can be used to train denoising models.
Huang et al. utilized an improved SRResNet and combined it
with the N2N strategy to achieve real-time speckle reduction in
OCT images of diﬀerent samples [26]. Bai et al. [27] proposed
a dual-sampling N2N framework, which combines symmet-
ric sampling and bicubic sampling to generate noisy image
pairs, avoiding reliance on noise distribution models. Yang
and Yang [28] utilized multiresolution analysis and wavelet
transform to generate self-supervised training pairs, thus elimi-
nating the need for high-signal-to-noise-ratio reference images.
Quan et al. [29] proposed the Self2Self strategy, which focuses
on single-image self-supervised speckle reduction. The core
goal of this strategy is to use the dropout technique to
learn speckle reduction from a single image. Ge et al. [30]
improved the Self2Self strategy by updating convolutional
layers to gated convolutional layers. Compared with the orig-
inal Self2Self network, this improvement can better extract
image features. Geng et al. [31] proposed a new triplet cross-
fusion learning (TCFL) strategy for unpaired OCT image
speckle reduction. This approach forms unpaired triplets with
clean and noisy images to help the network extract noise
information, greatly reducing the need for clean labels. Our
method does not require clean image labels as a training
benchmark. Instead, it leverages the characteristics of diﬀusion
models to learn solely from the feature distribution of noisy
images themselves.
B. Diﬀusion Model
Diﬀusion models have emerged as a powerful paradigm
for generative modeling, leveraging a forward process that
gradually corrupts data with noise and a reverse process that
iteratively denoises it [32], [33], [34]. Unlike GANs, diﬀusion
models excel in capturing complex data distributions while
avoiding mode collapse, making them particularly suitable
for image restoration tasks. Ho et al. proposed a simple yet
eﬀective diﬀusion probabilistic model for image generation,
which is a milestone in the ﬁeld of modern diﬀusion models
[35]. Recently, diﬀusion-based models have shown consid-
erable potential in various computer vision tasks [36], such
as conditional image generation [37] and image superreso-
lution [38]. Diﬀusion models also play a signiﬁcant role in
the medical ﬁeld. Their main application directions cover
multiple aspects, including medical image segmentation [39],
anomaly detection, and medical image denoising [19]. These
approaches align with our goal of unsupervised, frequency-
guided denoising for OCT data. Daras et al. proved that
when a diﬀusion model is trained solely on noisy data, the
marginal distribution of the reverse process progressively peels
oﬀ the stochastic component of the noise distribution and
converges to the clean data distribution [40]. Our FAD-Net
innovatively integrates the frequency-domain decomposition
capability of the wavelet transform into the diﬀusion model,
enabling denoising without the need for labels by leveraging
the characteristics of the frequency domain. This network
enhances ability of the model to handle high-frequency details.
C. Wavelet Transform-Based Methods
The wavelet transform can divide an image into the high-
frequency and low-frequency domains, which helps people
process the image in the frequency domain. In recent years,
the combination of wavelet transform and deep learning has
been widely explored in computer vision tasks. The wavelet
transform has made achievements in the areas of image
compression, image denoising, and image texture feature
extraction. Liu et al. [41] proposed a multilevel wavelet-CNN
to expand the receptive ﬁeld and achieved a better tradeoﬀ
between eﬃciency and recovery performance. Studies have
also used the wavelet transform to transform an image from
low resolution to high resolution. Xin et al. [42] decomposed a
low-resolution image into a series of wavelet coeﬃcients, used
a CNN to predict the corresponding series of high-resolution
coeﬃcients, and then used them to reconstruct the high-
resolution image. Li et al. [43] combined the transformer with
the wavelet transform and implemented an eﬀective multilevel
feature aggregation module. We utilize the high-frequency
subbands decomposed by the wavelet transform to extract
high-frequency features as prior information, which guides the
diﬀusion model for denoising. This approach optimizes detail
retention and structural reconstruction in stages under diﬀerent
noise levels.
III. M ETHOD
A. Baseline Architecture
The diﬀusion model is an image denoising method based
on a probabilistic model. It simulates the diﬀusion of noise by
progressively corrupting an input image with Gaussian noise
until it becomes pure noise, and then reconstructs the original
image by iteratively predicting and removing noise through a
noise-prediction network in the reverse process. Recent theo-
retical analyses [40] have demonstrated that diﬀusion models
trained on noisy observations can approximate the clean data
manifold, provided that the noise distribution is stationary and
Gaussian. This motivates our unsupervised formulation. On the
basis of these characteristics, we perform hierarchical feature
extraction on the high-frequency subbands via a bottom-up
multiscale convolutional layer architecture. This multiscale
convolutional layer architecture reduces the number of layers
as the network deepens, thus enabling the network to learn
the local detail information of the image in the shallow layers
and focus on the global representation of the high-frequency
detail features in the deep layers. This framework consists of
three parts: 1) contrastive learning pretrained structural fea-
ture encoder; 2) frequency-aware decomposition and dynamic
temporal fusion; and 3) unsupervised training based on noise
prediction. The framework of the FAD-Net is shown in Fig. 2.
B. Contrastive Learning Pretrained SFE
To learn semantically invariant features from unlabeled
OCT images, we design a SFE based on contrastive
predictive coding. Its core objective is to force the model
Authorized licensed use limited to: China Jiliang University. Downloaded on May 10,2026 at 01:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
5004816 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026
Fig. 2. FAD-Net architecture. FAD-Net distinguishes random noise from clean structures during backpropagation via the MHFB and the SFE, ultimately
achieving speckle suppression while preserving structures.
Fig. 3. Model architecture of the pretrained SFE. The yellow box represents the target patch xt, the blue box denotes the context patch xc, and the green
box indicates the structurally similar patch xs. Context patches and similar patches are treated as relevant positions to the target patch. By reducing feature
distances at relevant locations and increasing them at irrelevant locations, we induce structural features to encode the underlying contextual structure.
to learn features of image patches and establish cross-spatial
connections via contrastive learning. OCT images are self-
similar, and contextual information is closely related to image
structure. By reducing the feature distance of related positions
and increasing the feature distance of unrelated positions,
we induce structural features to encode potential contextual
structures, as shown in Fig. 3.
1) Input Patch Deﬁnition: For an input OCT image, the
SFE ﬁrst deﬁnes and samples three types of patches, with the
following key settings.
1) Target Patch x t: Randomly crop a P× P as the target
patch.
2) Context Patch xc: Sampled from the spatial adjacent area
of xt (oﬀset≤ P/2)
3) Structurally Similar Patch x s: Generated through long-
range semantic matching, ensure that it is spatially
distant from xt but texture-similar.
2) Generation of Structurally Similar Patch x s: Randomly
sample K long-range candidate patches in the image (the
Euclidean distance from the target patch is ≥ 2P)
C ={P| dist (P, Pt)≥ r· s} (1)
Authorized licensed use limited to: China Jiliang University. Downloaded on May 10,2026 at 01:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 5 =====
LIU et al.: FAD-Net: UNSUPERVISED FAD-Net FOR OCT SPECKLE REDUCTION 5004816
where dist(·) is the Manhattan distance, r is the distance
multiple, and s is the block size. This constraint ensures
that the candidate blocks and the target block are spatially
separated enough to avoid sampling local similar regions.
The patch with the most similar texture to xt, as measured
by the pixel-level cross correlation coeﬃcient Sim( Xt, X), is
selected as the positive sample xs
Sim (Xt, X) = Cov (Xt, X)
σXtσX
= E
 
Xt−µXt

(X−µX)

σXtσX
(2)
where µ and σ represent the mean and standard deviation,
respectively.
The structurally similar patch Xs is selected from the
candidate setC by maximizing the pixel-level similarity
Xs = argmax
X∈C
Sim (xt, X) (3)
whereC is the candidate set deﬁned in (1) and Sim(·) is given
in (2). Here, ∗argmax returns the argument that maximizes
the similarity.
3) Contrastive Loss for SFE Optimization: To optimize the
SFE, we design a triplet contrastive loss based on InfoNCE
loss [44] to optimize the SFE. The structural feature at position
Xi is deﬁned as zxi. The loss function is deﬁned as follows:
Lcon
= 1
3N
NX
i=1

LInfoNCE
 
zti,
˚
zci, zsi
	
+ LInfoNCE
 
zci,
˚
zti, zsi
	
+ + LInfoNCE
 
zsi,
˚
zti, zci
	
(4)
where the InfoNCE loss function is
InfoNCE
 
hi, h j

=− log exp
 
sim
 
hi, h j

/τ

PN
k=1 exp (sim (hi, hk)/τ)
(5)
where N is the batch size; and τ is the temperature parameter.
The structural features extracted by this module are mapped
and fed into the subsequent dynamic temporal fusion module
(see Section III-C), they provide structural-consistency guid-
ance for each noise-prediction step of the diﬀusion model.
C. Frequency-Aware Decomposition and Dynamic Temporal
Fusion
In this study, the DWT is employed to conduct frequency
domain decomposition of OCT images, and the multiscale
frequency domain features of the images are decoupled via
the Haar wavelet basis function. A TAWG dynamically fuses
these frequency priors with encoder features across diﬀusion
steps.
1) Wavelet Transform: Given a noisy OCT image I ∈
RH×W×C, where H×W is the spatial size and C is the number
of channels. It is decomposed into four subbands through a
2-D DWT, as shown in the following equation:
ILL, ILH, IHL, IHH = DWT (I). (6)
The 2-D Haar wavelet transform of the input image can be
decomposed into a low-frequency approximation component
(ILL) and three groups of high-frequency detail subbands ( ILH,
IHL, IHH ). Among them, ILL represents the approximation coef-
ﬁcients, ILH represents the horizontal details, IHL represents
the vertical details, and IHH represents the diagonal details.
The high-frequency subbands characterize the edge, texture,
and noise components of the image.
2) Multiscale High-Frequency Feature Extraction Block:
To improve the representational eﬀectiveness of high-
frequency features, the decomposed subbands are hierarchi-
cally processed through a multiscale convolutional structure.
As illustrated in Fig. 2, the Multiscale High-Frequency Feature
Extraction Block (MHFB) builds a four-level feature pyramid
within the backbone network, generating feature maps with
resolutions ranging from 16 × 16 to 128 × 128. This design
allows the network to progressively capture high-frequency
information from local details to the global context. For each
high frequency subband S ∈{ ILH, IHL, IHH}, MHFB employs
three cascaded convolutional blocks with channel shrinkage.
Each block combines a 3× 3 convolution, batch normalization,
and ReLU function activation. Through these convolutional
layers, we can obtain the high-frequency features Hi
j for i
ranging from 1 to 4. i and j index the layer depth and scale
level, respectively. Therefore, the expression for feature H at
the ith row and jth column is
Hi
j
=
8
ˆˆ
ˆ
ˆ
<
ˆˆ
ˆ
ˆ
:
BConv

Concat

Hi
j−1, U p

Hi+1
j

, if i + j≤ 4
BConv
 
Concat
 
Hi
j−1, Z

, if i = 4 & j = 1
BConv

Concat

Hi
j−1, U p

Hi+1
j−1

, if i + j = 5 &
i , 4
(7)
where BConv represents the 3 × 3 Conv-Bn-Relu operation.
Concat(·) indicates the concatenation operation, and U p(·) is
an upsampling operation with a rate of 2. Z represents the zero
matrix.
Speciﬁcally, the feature pyramid is constructed using a
combination of bottom-up hierarchical construction and lateral
fusion strategies. As shown in (7), along the horizontal direc-
tion, the network progressively propagates features from the
previous scale Hi
j−1 within the same layer to enable scale-wise
information ﬂow. Along the vertical direction, features from
a deeper layer Hi+1
j are ﬁrst upsampled to match the current
spatial resolution and then concatenated with the horizontally
propagated features.
The ﬁnal multiscale features Fh = {Hi
j | i + j = 5} are
injected into the diﬀusion denoising network via a dynamic
weighting mechanism.
3) Time-Aware Weight Generator: To dynamically integrate
high-frequency priors into the denoising process,the TAWG is
embedded within the encoder–decoder architecture. At each
diﬀusion step t, the TAWG produces a spatially adaptive
weight matrix through a multilayer perceptron
Wt =σ(W2· GELU (W1· t + b1) + b2) (8)
where σ(·) denotes the sigmoid function that constrains Wt∈
(0, 1), and W1, W2, b1, and b2 are learnable parameters. This
design enables the network to generate time-dependent fusion
Authorized licensed use limited to: China Jiliang University. Downloaded on May 10,2026 at 01:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 6 =====
5004816 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026
Fig. 4. Diﬀusion model process.
weights that adaptively control the contributions of diﬀerent
feature sources during the denoising process.
The ﬁnal fused feature is then computed as follows:
Ffuse = (1− Wt)⊙ Fenc + Wt⊙ Fh (9)
where Fenc represents the feature obtained by performing
cross-attention between the encoder feature Funet of U-Net
and the spatially projected feature from SFE. The element-
wise multiplication operator ⊙ adaptively blends the encoder
feature and the high-frequency prior according to Wt.
The fused feature F f use is constructed in a multiscale
manner to form a hierarchical set which is tailored to match
the hierarchical layers of the U-Net decoder. Speciﬁcally,
as the noise-prediction network progressively upsamples the
feature maps, the corresponding hierarchical fused feature map
Fi
f use is ﬁrst spatially aligned and then dynamically injected
into the decoding pathway. This layer-wise integration allows
the network to directly exploit frequency-aware details across
multiple resolutions, thereby guiding the noise estimation
process to achieve more robust performance.
D. Unsupervised Training Based on Noise Prediction
Unsupervised denoising diﬀusion models are illustrated in
Fig. 4. In the forward process q, Gaussian noise is progres-
sively added to the input image x0 over T timesteps, whereas
in the reverse process pθ, a neural network parameterized by
θ learns to iteratively denoise the image and reconstruct the
clean sample.
The noise injection at each timestep t is
xt =√
αtx0 +
p
1−αtϵ, ϵ ∼N (0, I) (10)
where the noise schedule αt controls the magnitude of the
added noise, and ϵ denotes additive Gaussian noise. The
reverse diﬀusion process involves recovering the original
image x0 from the noisy image xt.
The conditional probability distribution is expressed as
follows:
pθ (xt−1| xt, Ffuse) =N
 
xt−1;µθ (xt, t, Ffuse),σ 2
t I

(11)
where σt controls the update step size. The conditional mean
µθ is computed using the noise prediction ϵθ as follows:
µθ (xt, t, Ffuse) = 1√αt

xt− 1−αt√1− ¯αt
ϵθ (xt, t, Ffuse)

. (12)
Algorithm 1 Training Procedures of FAD-Net
1: repeat
2: ILL, ILH, IHL, IHH = DWT(I)
3: Fh = MHFB({ILH, IHL, IHH})
4: t∼ Uniform({1,..., T});
5: ϵt∼N (0, I);
6: xt =√ ¯αt· Inoisy +√1− ¯αt·ϵt
7: Extract encoder features Fenc from xt using U-Net
encoder;
8: Wt = Sigmoid(W2· GELU(W1· t + b1) + b2)
9: F f use = (1− Wt)⊙ Fenc + Wt⊙ Fh
10: Take gradient descent step on ∇θ∥ϵθ(xt, t, Ffuse)−ϵt∥2
11: until converged
On the basis of the ﬁnally predicted noise ˆ ϵθ, the clean
image can be reconstructed as follows:
ˆx0 = 1√ ¯αt
·

xt−
p
1− ¯αt· ˆϵθ

. (13)
During training, the network parameters are optimized by
minimizing a suitable loss function
Lθ = E(x0,ϵt,t)||ϵθ (xt, t, Ffuse)−ϵt||2 (14)
where ϵt∼N (0, I) is the ground-truth Gaussian noise. Mini-
mizing this objective guides the network to accurately predict
the injected noise across various timesteps, thus enabling
eﬀective unsupervised denoising. The training steps are listed
in Algorithm 1.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Dataset and Implementation Details
1) Dataset: To better verify the eﬀectiveness of the pro-
posed method for OCT image denoising, four datasets were
used in the experiments, including three public datasets and
one custom dataset. Speciﬁcally, the OCT 2017 dataset pro-
vided by the University of California, San Diego, agreement
[45] under the CC BY 4.0 license, was used for training. Public
datasets that have been widely used in the ﬁeld of retinal OCT
image denoising (i.e., the DUKE17 [46] and DUKE28 [47]
datasets) and the custom dataset ZJUT1310 datasets were used
for testing.
The OCT2017 dataset provides 84 484 OCT images of
various retinopathies, such as choroidal neovascularization
Authorized licensed use limited to: China Jiliang University. Downloaded on May 10,2026 at 01:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 7 =====
LIU et al.: FAD-Net: UNSUPERVISED FAD-Net FOR OCT SPECKLE REDUCTION 5004816
TABLE I
DATASET DIVISION
(CNV), diabetes macular edema (DME), early AMD and
normal retina.
The DUKE17 dataset originates from the multicenter clin-
ical trial of the A2A SDOCT study, which included 17
eyes from 17 subjects, including both normal subjects and
patients with nonneovascular age-related macular degeneration
(AMD). The data were collected using Bioptigen’s SDOCT
imaging system and included two types of scans: one is a
square volume scan of approximately 6.6 × 6.6 mm, contain-
ing 1000 A-scans and 100 B-scans, covering the fovea; the
other is a meridional repeat scan targeting the fovea, with
1000 A-scans and 40 B-scans.
The DUKE28 dataset was acquired from 28 eyes of 28
subjects, including both normal and nonneovascular AMD
patients, via the Bioptigen 840 nm wavelength SDOCT imag-
ing system.
The ZJUT1310 dataset was used to prove the generalizabil-
ity of the proposed method, and we collected 50 pieces of
ﬁngerprint data on a self-built OCT system [5], as the test set.
Its optical source is 1310 nm, the coherence length is 13.3 µm,
the bandwidth is 85.6 nm, the axial resolution is 8.82 µm,
the lateral resolution is 55.7 µm, the A-line scanning rate is
60 kHz, the maximum image depth of the ZJUT1310 dataset
is 4.64 mm, and the scanning range is 18 × 14 mm2.
The detailed dataset division is shown in Table I. OCT2017
is a dataset for OCT retinal classiﬁcation that contains noisy
images without labels. To verify that our method can achieve
good results on small datasets, we randomly selected 500
images from the dataset as the training set. The public datasets
DUKE17 and DUKE28 and the custom dataset ZJUT1310
were used only as test sets. To further investigate the stability
of the proposed model with such limited training data, a
dedicated stability analysis is conducted in Section IV-D.
2) Implementation Details: The images in both the training
and testing sets have been resized to 512 × 512. To verify the
generality and generalization ability of our method on diﬀerent
datasets, DUKE17 and DUKE28 were used as cross domain
tests. Examples of images from the three datasets are shown
in Fig. 5.
In this study, we implemented the proposed FAD-Net using
the PyTorch framework. All the experiments were conducted
on an NVIDIA RTX 4090D GPU with 24 GB of memory.
For network optimization, we employed the Adam optimizer
with momentum parameters β1 = 0.5 and β2 = 0.999. During
training, we selected a batch size of 2 and set the learning rate
to 0.0001. The maximum number of training iterations was set
to 100, and the model with the minimum loss value among
these iterations was saved for further evaluation.
Fig. 5. Examples from the DUKE17, DUKE28, and OCT2017 datasets. The
red boxes delineate the texture area, whereas the green boxes delineate the
relatively uniform background area.
In this study, to evaluate the practical deployability of our
model, we measured the training time, inference speed, and
GPU resource consumption. The total training process for
100 epochs took 231.38 min on an NVIDIA RTX 4090D
GPU. During training, the overall GPU memory usage reached
20.09 GB. For inference, the model achieved an average
processing time of 215.81 ms per image, with 0.16 GB of
GPU memory allocated and 1.32 GB reserved. These results
indicate that, in both research and real-world scenarios, the
model can complete training and inference within acceptable
time and resource limits, demonstrating its practical feasibility
for deployment.
B. Evaluation Metrics
Five widely used quantitative metrics were employed to
comprehensively evaluate the denoising performance from
multiple dimensions: the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR),
the structural similarity index (SSIM), the contrast-to-noise
ratio (CNR), the edge preservation index (EPI), and the
equivalent number of looks (ENLs). The PSNR evaluates the
degree of distortion by calculating the pixel diﬀerence between
the denoised image and the noise-free reference image, and it
is measured in decibels (dB)
PSNR = 10· log10
 I2
max
MSE

(15)
where Imax represents the maximum pixel value of the image
(e.g, 255 for an 8-bit image), and mse is the mean squared
error
mse = 1
M· N
MX
i=1
NX
j=1

Igt (i, j)− Iden (i, j)
2
(16)
where Igt is the ground truth image and Iden is the denoised
image. Higher PSNR values indicate lower image distortion
and better noise suppression.
The SSIM evaluates image similarity in three dimensions:
luminance, contrast, and structure. This index ranges from
Authorized licensed use limited to: China Jiliang University. Downloaded on May 10,2026 at 01:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 8 =====
5004816 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026
Fig. 6. Denoising performance comparison of DUKE17. (a) Noisy. (b) Clean. (c) Self2Self. (d) S2SNet. (e) DnCNN. (f) TCFL. (g) DDPM. (h) Our FAD-Net.
[0, 1], with values closer to 1 indicating better structural
preservation
SSIM (x, y) =

l (x, y)
α
·

c (x, y)
β
·

s (x, y)
γ
. (17)
The CNR characterizes the contrast between the target and
the background relative to the noise intensity
CNR = |µA−µB|q
σ2
A +σ2
B
(18)
where µAand µB are the means of the target and background
regions, respectively, and σ2
Aand σ2
B are the corresponding
variances. Higher values indicate better contrast preservation.
The calculations are based on four regions of interest (ROIs)
and one background ROI, as shown in Fig. 5.
The ENLs is used to evaluate the smoothness of homoge-
neous regions and is calculated as follows:
ENLi = µ2
i
σ2
i
(19)
where µi and σi represent the mean and standard deviation,
respectively, of the ROIs.
The EPI reﬂects edge detail preservation capability and is
calculated as follows:
EPI =
P
W
P
H|Id (x + 1, y)− Id (x, y)|P
W
P
H|In (x + 1, y)− In (x, y)| (20)
where In is the noisy image and Id is the denoised image. To
avoid interference from gradient changes in uniform regions,
this experiment performs calculations only within edge region
ROIs.
C. Experimental Analysis
To verify the eﬀectiveness of the proposed FAD-
Net method, we designed comparative experiments, which
included two self-supervised methods [29], [30] and three
unsupervised methods [31], [48], [49].
1) Visual Eﬀects Analysis: As shown in Fig. 6, we selected
a representative OCT image from the DUKE17 dataset to
visualize the denoising performance of all the methods. The
two ROIs in the image were magniﬁed and marked with red
and green rectangular frames. The denoising results of the self-
supervised algorithms are shown in Fig. 6(c) and (d) show,
respectively. Fig. 6(e) and (f) presents the denoising results of
the algorithms in the ﬁeld of unsupervised learning. Specif-
ically, compared with the original image, those of Self2Self
[29] and S2SNet [30] are limited by their training methods;
speciﬁcally, these two algorithms fail to eﬀectively remove the
speckle noise in the original image.
Although TCFL [31] achieved relatively signiﬁcant denois-
ing eﬀects, as shown in the ﬁgure, some structural details
were lost. Although the DnCNN [48] has achieved some noise
Authorized licensed use limited to: China Jiliang University. Downloaded on May 10,2026 at 01:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 9 =====
LIU et al.: FAD-Net: UNSUPERVISED FAD-Net FOR OCT SPECKLE REDUCTION 5004816
Fig. 7. Visual comparison of speckle noise suppression on fundus OCT images. The corresponding residual images are listed in the second row.
TABLE II
DENOISING PERFORMANCE ON DUKE17
reduction eﬀects, closer observation revealed black spot noise
in the image that is di ﬃcult to remove. The denoising result
of the DDPM [49] method has a low contrast, and the texture
details are not well presented. The corresponding residual
images between the speckle removal results and the ground
truth are shown in Fig. 7. In contrast, our proposed FAD-Net
both eﬀectively suppress speckle noise and eﬀectively preserve
many biological structural details. The visual performance on
the data from the DUKE28 dataset is shown in Fig. 8.
2) Quantitative Indicator Analysis: Table II summarizes
the quantitative results of unsupervised algorithms on the
DUKE17 dataset. FAD-Net outperforms the other unsuper-
vised methods in terms of most of the metrics, which is
consistent with the visual results. Table III presents the quan-
titative metrics for the DUKE28 dataset. Compared with the
other methods, our method also achieves excellent results on
the DUKE28 dataset.
To further validate the reliability of our proposed method-
ological improvements—particularly for the ENL metric, a
metric prone to high variability owing to its inherent sensitivity
to local signal intensity ﬂuctuations—we performed a stringent
statistical analysis. As presented in Table IV, we computed the
95% conﬁdence intervals (CIs) for all comparative methods.
Notably, FAD-Net achieves consistently higher mean perfor-
mance values than competing methods across all evaluated
datasets. For the DUKE28 dataset, the 95% CI of FAD-Net is
distinctly disjoint from those of most baseline methods. This
cross-dataset consistency demonstrates that the performance
gains delivered by FAD-Net are reliable and not attributable
to the random ﬂuctuations inherent in individual samples, thus
validating the robustness of our proposed model.
3) Analysis of Spectral Bias: To evaluate the spectral
diﬀerences between our method and other deep learning algo-
rithms, we conducted a frequency analysis. High-frequency
Authorized licensed use limited to: China Jiliang University. Downloaded on May 10,2026 at 01:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 10 =====
5004816 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026
Fig. 8. Denoising performance comparison of DUKE28. (a) Noisy. (b) Clean. (c) Self2Self. (d) S2SNet. (e) DnCNN. (f) TCFL. (g) DDPM. (h) Our FAD-Net.
TABLE III
DENOISING PERFORMANCE ON DUKE28
TABLE IV
95% CI S OF ENL FOR THE DUKE17 AND DUKE28 D ATASETS
components generally cover detailed information such as
edges, textures, and ﬁne structures. In the ﬁeld of medical
imaging ﬁeld, these details play crucial roles in the diagnosis
and treatment of diseases. Therefore, the OCT speckle reduc-
tion task is usually expected to remove as much noise as
possible while retaining these high-frequency details.
First, we perform a 2-D Fourier transform on the image to
convert the image from the spatial domain to the frequency
domain. Afterward, we carry out a spectrum centering oper-
ation, that is, we move the low-frequency components of the
spectrum to the center of the spectrum. Afterward, we take the
logarithmic average of the intensity of each A line and plot
the intensity values on the pixels for spectral analysis.
As shown in Fig. 9, the spectrum diagrams of each OCT
denoising result are generated on the basis of this process.
The average spectrum of the images generated by our model is
quite similar to that of the labeled clean images. Moreover, the
Authorized licensed use limited to: China Jiliang University. Downloaded on May 10,2026 at 01:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 11 =====
LIU et al.: FAD-Net: UNSUPERVISED FAD-Net FOR OCT SPECKLE REDUCTION 5004816
Fig. 9. Spectrum diagrams of each OCT denoising result.
Fig. 10. High-frequency component diﬀerence diagram. Dark colors indicate
smaller diﬀerences from the clean image.
diﬀerence map shows the diﬀerences in amplitude between the
labeled images and the denoised images in the high-frequency
region. By analyzing this diﬀerence map, the reconstruction
quality of the denoised images in the high-frequency region
can be evaluated. The corresponding error map, presented in
the form of a heatmap, is shown in Fig. 10. Brighter color
indicates greater errors; darker color indicates smaller errors.
Our method clearly occupies the largest dark area in the error
heatmap, which fully indicates that the deviation between our
method and the labeled clean image is small. It further shows
that the learned denoising trajectory converges toward the
clean spectral distribution.
To further verify the noise reduction eﬀects of the various
methods in the frequency domain, we analyzed the average
intensity distributions of the images processed by diﬀerent
methods in the frequency domain, as shown in Fig. 11. The
x-axis represents the pixel location, and the y-axis represents
the average intensity on a logarithmic scale. The central
peak represents the low-frequency components of the image,
whereas the sides represent the high-frequency regions. The
labels LR in the ﬁgure represent noisy images, whereas HR
represents clean images. The ﬁgure shows that our method has
certain advantages over the other methods. Our method (rep-
resented by the red dashed line in the ﬁgure) has an average
intensity in the high-frequency region (side of the ﬁgure) that
is closer to the intensity of the HR. Considering the overall
trend of the curve, the deviation between the curve of our
methods and the curve of the labeled image is small, indicating
Fig. 11. Line graph of the average intensity distribution of denoised images
using diﬀerent methods in the frequency domain.
that our method can better restore the high-frequency details
of the image in the reconstruction process and thus generate
results closer to those of the original high-resolution image.
In contrast, the OCT denoising results generated by existing
deep learning methods suﬀer from spectral bias issues.
D. Stability Analysis Under Limited Training Data
To evaluate the stability of FAD-Net under limited training
data scenarios, we conducted complementary experiments on
the OCT2017 dataset.
We ﬁrst assessed robustness against variations in data
sampling by ﬁxing the training set size at 500 images and per-
forming three independent training runs with distinct randomly
selected subsets. All experiments were conducted with an
identical network architecture, training protocol, and hyperpa-
rameter conﬁguration, and were evaluated on the independent
Duke17 test set. The quantitative results are summarized in
Table V, revealing minimal performance variability across
the three runs and thus demonstrating low sensitivity to the
selection of the training subset.
Furthermore, we investigated the impact of training set size
by constructing training subsets of three diﬀerent scales (100,
300, and 500 images) randomly sampled from the OCT2017
dataset. Each conﬁguration was replicated three times with dis-
tinct random seeds to ensure statistical reliability. As presented
in Table VI, model performance improves monotonically with
increasing training set size. Collectively, these ﬁndings verify
that FAD-Net achieves stable training dynamics and robust
denoising performance even under small-sample conditions.
Overall, these results conﬁrm that FAD-Net exhibits stable
training behavior and reliable denoising performance even
under small-sample conditions.
E. Discussion
1) Comparison and Discussion With Supervision Methods:
Supervised methods such as the DnCNN, GAN based models,
and specialized OCT denoising often rely on large-scale paired
datasets to learn noise maps, and they typically achieve strong
baseline performance in PSNR and SSIM on standard bench-
marks such as DUKE17/DUKE28. For example, it has been
reported that supervised SDSR-OCT [50] achieved a PSNR
value of 27.826–28.132 dB on DUKE28, which is comparable
to the PSNR value of FAD-Net.
Authorized licensed use limited to: China Jiliang University. Downloaded on May 10,2026 at 01:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 12 =====
5004816 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026
TABLE V
PERFORMANCE OF FAD-N ET ON DIFFERENT RANDOM SUBSETS CONSISTING OF 500 T RAINING IMAGES
TABLE VI
PERFORMANCE OF FAD-N ET UNDER VARYING TRAINING SET SIZES
Fig.
12. PSNR values at diﬀerent time steps on DUKE17 and DUKE28.
Moreover, according to work [51], a supervised U-Net
achieved a PSNR of 30.845 dB under unseen noise condi-
tions, further demonstrating the strong baseline of supervised
training when suﬃcient paired data are available.
A key advantage of the FAD-Net over supervised alterna-
tives is its robustness to data scarcity. In addition, supervised
methods may overﬁt the noise distribution of their training
pairs, which limits the generalizability of heterogeneous OCT
devices.
2) Optimal Sampling Time Analysis: We evaluated the
denoising results of the FAD-Net by setting diﬀerent time
steps. As shown in Fig. 12, 10 diﬀerent time steps ranging
from 10 to 100 were selected. At each time step t, the noisy
image was forward-propagated through the model to obtain
the predicted denoised image. Afterward, the PSNR between
this image and the true clean image was calculated. For the
DUKE17 and DUKE28 datasets, the average PSNR values at
each time step were calculated and plotted on a graph. It can
be clearly observed from the graph that on DUKE17, when
the sampling time reaches approximately t = 50, the PSNR
value between the denoised images predicted by the model
and the reference images reaches a signiﬁcant level. After this
point, the PSNR decreases slightly but then stabilizes. With
respective to DUKE28, a signiﬁcant diﬀerence is achieved
when the sampling time reaches t = 30. At this time, the
model is already capable of restoring images of relatively high
quality, and the subsequent relative stability in the PSNR value
implies that the model has been able to produce of high-quality
images.
3) Noise Robustness Analysis: In conducting robustness
analysis, we chose to introduce Gaussian noise, following the
approach outlined in the referenced literature [31]. During
the experiments, Gaussian noise with noise levels σ2 of
0.01, 0.05, 0.1 and 0.2 was selected to simulate the noise
conditions that may be encountered in the actual imaging
process. We applied FAD-Net trained on the OCT2017 dataset
to a set of DUKE17 datasets with diﬀerent noise levels for
testing, to evaluate the generalization ability of the model.
In the experimental setup, we ﬁrst added diﬀerent levels
of Gaussian noise to the original images, and then used our
FAD-Net to process the noisy images. The performance of the
model was evaluated by PSNR and SSIM. The simulated noisy
OCT images and the corresponding denoising results of the
FAD-Net are shown in Fig. 13. The experimental results show
that this algorithm can e ﬀectively handle diﬀerent noise levels
and can eﬀectively restore noisy images, demonstrating its
robustness and eﬀectiveness under diﬀerent noise conditions.
Speciﬁcally when the noise level σ2 = 0.2, although the
quality of the simulated noisy images deteriorates, the model
can still eﬀectively remove the noise. The relevant quantitative
results are listed in Table VII. These results demonstrate the
potential of our OCT denoising model in practical applications,
especially under imaging conditions with high noise levels.
4) Application of Denoising Model on Fingerprint Dataset:
The ﬁngerprint dataset is a collection of images with unique
texture features and noise patterns. In this study, we used a
custom OCT system to acquire 50 OCT images of ﬁngerprints.
We compared the proposed model with classic denoising
methods such as S2SNet [30], Self2Self [29], DnCNN [48],
and OCT DDPM [49]. The visual results in Fig. 14 intu-
itively show that when processing the ﬁngerprint OCT images,
our FAD-Net exhibits excellent noise ﬁltering capabilities.
The red-framed areas particularly highlight the advantage of
the model in preserving the detailed texture of ﬁngerprints. The
quantitative indicators are shown in TableVIII. Compared with
the other methods, it can eﬀectively ﬁlter out noise while better
maintaining the integrity of the key features of ﬁngerprints.
These results fully indicate that the proposed model has
Authorized licensed use limited to: China Jiliang University. Downloaded on May 10,2026 at 01:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 13 =====
LIU et al.: FAD-Net: UNSUPERVISED FAD-Net FOR OCT SPECKLE REDUCTION 5004816
TABLE VII
QUANTITATIVE RESULTS OF FAD-N ET UNDER DIFFERENT SPECKLE NOISE LEVELS ON DUKE17
Fig.
13. Denoising performance of FAD-Net under diﬀerent Gaussian noise
levels on DUKE17.
TABLE VIII
QUANTITATIVE RESULTS OF DENOISING THE FINGERPRINT DATASETS
USING DIFFERENT METHODS
superior
generalization performance and can achieve eﬃcient
denoising on heterogeneous data. This characteristic not only
expands the application scope of the model but also conﬁrms
that its denoising mechanism does not rely on the inherent
characteristics of speciﬁc data. Instead, it captures a more
general image denoising pattern, thus enabling it to perform
stably in complex and real-world scenarios.
F . Ablation Study
In this section, we describe the impact of various com-
ponents of the ability of the FAD-Net module to denoise
OCT images. To delve into the speciﬁc contributions of each
component of the FAD-Net module to denoise OCT images,
this study employs a progressive ablation strategy for the
experiments conducted in this section. The baseline model
is DDPM, which, as a classic denoising diﬀusion model,
possesses a certain level of fundamental performance in the
ﬁeld of image denoising.
To validate the eﬀectiveness of the core modules in the
FAD-Net, two sets of ablation experiments were designed
by removing the structural prior module and the frequency
dependent decomposition module to compare the performance
diﬀerences between the complete model and the ablated
models on the DUKE17 public fundus dataset. Removing
the frequency domain decomposition module is called FAD1,
removing the structural prior module is called FAD2, and
retaining two modules is called FAD3. The quantitative data
in Table IX present the eﬀectiveness of these two modules.
To further investigate the impact of individual compo-
nents within the frequency-domain decomposition module on
denoising performance, additional ablation experiments were
conducted to analyze the eﬀects of each element in this
module. Building on this foundation, the MHFB is embedded
into the DDPM to form Model 1. MHFB has a deep nested
convolutional structure and aims to enhance the extraction
and processing capabilities of edge regions. The TAWG is
integrated into Model 1, achieving collaborative optimization
of high-frequency detail enhancement and noise distribu-
tion decoupling through a dynamic temporal fusion strategy,
resulting in Model 2. The frequency-aware mechanism lever-
ages the DWT to perform frequency domain decomposition
on OCT images, acquire low-frequency global components
and high-frequency detail components, and inject multiscale
high-frequency features as prior information into the noise
prediction process of the diﬀusion model. To investigate
whether the addition of the wavelet transform can eﬀectively
assist the model in learning high-frequency edge information,
we incorporated the wavelet transform into Model 1 to form
Model 3, and into Model 2 to form Model 4.
The quantitative results in Table X indicate that the baseline
model has a certain basic performance in terms of various
indicators. Compared with the baseline model, Model 1 shows
an improvement in indicators such as the PSNR and SSIM
after its high-frequency feature extraction ability is enhanced,
indicating that the multilevel convolutional module contributes
Authorized licensed use limited to: China Jiliang University. Downloaded on May 10,2026 at 01:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 14 =====
5004816 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026
Fig. 14. Visual results of denoising the ﬁngerprint datasets using diﬀerent methods.
TABLE IX
AVERAGE PSNR ( DB) AND SSIM OF THE FAD-N ET ABLATION EXPERIMENT ON DUKE17
TABLE X
AVERAGE PSNR ( DB) AND SSIM FOR THE ABLATION EXPERIMENTS OF THE FREQUENCY -D OMAIN DECOMPOSITION MODULE ON DUKE17
positively to the denoising performance. It can improve the
image quality to a certain extent and better preserve the
image details and structure. In the comparative experiments
between Model 3 and Model 4, the experimental groups
with the TAWG added have signiﬁcantly higher values of
the two key indicators of PSNR and SSIM than do the
control groups without this mechanism. Moreover, the PSNR
of Model 4 is signiﬁcantly greater than that of the other control
models, indicating that the combinations of the dynamic
weight and the frequency perception module complement
each other and are more conducive to improving images
quality.
G. Analysis of Periodic Artifacts
Notably, faint periodic artifacts can be observed in some
residual maps (e.g., Fig. 7). Our analysis indicates that
these artifacts mainly stem from the energy distribution
characteristics of the high-frequency subbands during wavelet
decomposition. Because the DWT employs ﬁnitely sup-
ported basis functions in multiscale decomposition, the
high-frequency responses may introduce weak periodic tex-
tures upon reconstruction [52].
From Fig. 15, it can also be observed that FAD2 and
FAD3 exhibit slight oscillatory artifacts around homogeneous
background regions, which are consistent with the wavelet-
induced periodic textures. These artifacts primarily aﬀect ﬂat
or low-variance areas but have a negligible inﬂuence on
structural regions.
It should be emphasized that the amplitude of these periodic
artifacts is low relative to the dominant structural signal, so
their impact on overall structural ﬁdelity is limited. Consistent
with the frequency-domain analyses presented in Figs. 9–11,
FAD-Net’s high-frequency energy distribution closely matches
that of clean images, showing that the artifacts do not cause
Authorized licensed use limited to: China Jiliang University. Downloaded on May 10,2026 at 01:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 15 =====
LIU et al.: FAD-Net: UNSUPERVISED FAD-Net FOR OCT SPECKLE REDUCTION 5004816
Fig. 15. Visual comparison of ablation studies on DUKE17.
noticeable high-frequency distortions or degrade the perceptual
quality of reconstructed structures.
In future work, we plan to explore adaptive frequency-
domain regularization and improve wavelet based designs
to further reduce such artifacts and to enhance the balance
between detail recovery and structural consistency.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we propose an unsupervised frequency-aware
denoising network, namely, FAD-Net. It is based on the
wavelet transform and addresses issues in OCT technology,
where imaging is susceptible to noise interference because
of low sampling rates, and existing denoising methods suﬀer
from either poor denoising eﬀects or a dependency on large
amounts of paired data. The experimental results were based
on data from the public OCT fundus DUKE17 and DUKE28
datasets and revealed that FAD-Net achieves PSNR and SSIM
values of 27.756/0.713 and 28.132/0.732, respectively. Addi-
tionally, we veriﬁed the generalizability of FAD-Net on the
OCT ﬁngerprint dataset. Moreover, we validated the eﬀec-
tiveness of the frequency-domain guidance in the diﬀusion
model. This advances clearer visualization of microstructural
pathological changes to support more accurate clinical diag-
noses and improves biometrics by delivering more stable,
high-ﬁdelity OCT ﬁngerprint data, thereby strengthening the
security and reliability of identity authentication systems.
Moreover, it is well-suited for data-scarce clinical or indus-
trial scenarios, and its frequency-aware denoising framework
provides a practical foundation for potential integration with
OCT hardware systems, which could further optimize real-
time imaging performance in onsite biometric detection.
REFERENCES
[1] A. M. Zysk, F. T. Nguyen, A. L. Oldenburg, D. L. Marks, and
S. A. Boppart, “Optical coherence tomography: A review of clinical
development from bench to bedside,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 12, no. 5,
2007, Art. no. 051403.
[2] Y .-P. Liu, Q. Zhong, R. Liang, Z. Li, H. Wang, and P. Chen, “Layer
segmentation of OCT ﬁngerprints with an adaptive Gaussian prior
guided transformer,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, 2022, Art.
no. 5023515.
[3] H. Sun, Y . Zhang, P. Chen, H. Wang, Y .-P. Liu, and R. Liang, “A new
approach in automated ﬁngerprint presentation attack detection using
optical coherence tomography,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security,
vol. 18, pp. 4243–4257, 2023.
[4] Y .-P. Liu, W. Zuo, R. Liang, H. Sun, and Z. Li, “Prototype-
guided autoencoder for OCT-based ﬁngerprint presentation attack
detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 3461–3475,
2023.
[5] H. Sun et al., “Synchronous ﬁngerprint acquisition system based on
total internal reﬂection and optical coherence tomography,” IEEE Trans.
Instrum. Meas., vol. 69, no. 10, pp. 8452–8465, Oct. 2020.
[6] Y .-P. Liu et al., “Orthogonal view-based attention network for layer
segmentation of 3D OCT ﬁngerprints,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Security, vol. 20, pp. 5705–5717, 2025.
[7] Y .-P. Liu et al., “Test-time image reconstruction for cross-device OCT
ﬁngerprint extraction,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 20,
pp. 1049–1064, 2025.
[8] Q. Miao, H. Wang, Y . Zhang, R. Yan, and Y . Liu, “Sweat gland
enhancement method for ﬁngertip OCT images based on generative
adversarial network,” IEEE Trans. Biometrics, Behav., Identity Sci. ,
vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 550–560, Oct. 2024.
[9] Y . Zhang, X. Li, H. Wang, R. Wang, P. Chen, and R. Liang, “Sweat
gland extraction from optical coherence tomography using convolutional
neural network,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, 2023, Art. no.
5003816.
[10] B. Ding, H. Wang, P. Chen, Y . Zhang, R. Liang, and Y . Liu,
“Subcutaneous sweat pore estimation from optical coherence
tomography,” IET Image Process., vol. 15, no. 13, pp. 3267–3280,
Nov. 2021.
[11] H. Wang et al., “OCT ﬁngerprint presentation attack detection based on
dual-branch reconstruction diﬀerences,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
vol. 74, 2025, Art. no. 5030514.
[12] Y . Guo et al., “Structure-aware noise reduction generative adversarial
network for optical coherence tomography image,” in Proc. Int. Work-
shop Ophthalmic Med. Image Anal. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2019,
pp. 9–17.
[13] Y . Huang et al., “Noise-powered disentangled representation for
unsupervised speckle reduction of optical coherence tomography
images,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 40, no. 10, pp. 2600–2614,
Oct. 2021.
[14] B. Chong and Y .-K. Zhu, “Speckle reduction in optical coherence
tomography images of human ﬁnger skin by wavelet modiﬁed BM3D
ﬁlter,”Opt. Commun., vol. 291, pp. 461–469, Mar. 2013.
Authorized licensed use limited to: China Jiliang University. Downloaded on May 10,2026 at 01:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 16 =====
5004816 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 75, 2026
[15] X. Zhang, L. Li, F. Zhu, W. Hou, and X. Chen, “Spiking cortical
model–based nonlocal means method for speckle reduction in optical
coherence tomography images,” J. Biomed. Opt. , vol. 19, no. 6, Jun.
2014, Art. no. 066005.
[16] X. Wei, X. Liu, A. Yu, T. Fu, and D. Liu, “Clustering-oriented multiple
convolutional neural networks for optical coherence tomography image
denoising,” in Proc. 11th Int. Congr. Image Signal Process., Biomed.
Eng. Informat. (CISP-BMEI), Oct. 2018, pp. 1–5.
[17] B. Qiu et al., “Noise reduction in optical coherence tomogra-
phy images using a deep neural network with perceptually-sensitive
loss function,” Biomed. Opt. Exp., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 817–830,
2020.
[18] N. A. Kande, R. Dakhane, A. Dukkipati, and P. K. Yalavarthy,
“SiameseGAN: A generative model for denoising of spectral domain
optical coherence tomography images,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 180–192, Jan. 2021.
[19] Y . Zhang, C. Huneau, J. Idier, and D. Mateus, “Ultrasound imag-
ing based on the variance of a diﬀusion restoration model,” in
Proc. 32nd Eur. Signal Process. Conf. (EUSIPCO), Aug. 2024,
pp. 760–764.
[20] Y . Wang, “Implicit image-to-image Schrodinger bridge for CT super-
resolution and denoising,” 2025, arXiv:2403.06069.
[21] X. Li, Z. Dong, H. Liu, J. J. Kang-Mieler, Y . Ling, and Y . Gan,
“Frequency-aware optical coherence tomography image super-resolution
via conditional generative adversarial neural network,” Biomed. Opt.
Exp., vol. 14, no. 10, pp. 5148–5161, 2023.
[22] N. Rahaman et al., “On the spectral bias of neural networks,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, pp. 5301–5310.
[23] M. Tancik et al., “Fourier features let networks learn high frequency
functions in low dimensional domains,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 7537–7547.
[24] B. Su, X. Hu, J. Xu, K. Deng, Y . Zha, and J. Wan, “Semi-supervised
CT denoising via text-guided mamba diﬀusion models,” IEEE Trans.
Instrum. Meas., vol. 74, 2025, Art. no. 4506313.
[25] J. Lehtinen et al., “Noise2Noise: Learning image restoration without
clean data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2018, pp. 2965–2974.
[26] Y . Huang, N. Zhang, and Q. Hao, “Real-time noise reduction based
on ground truth free deep learning for optical coherence tomography,”
Biomed. Opt. Exp., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 2027–2040, 2021.
[27] J. Bai, D. Zhu, and M. Chen, “Dual-sampling Noise2Noise: Eﬃcient
single-image denoising,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 74, 2025,
Art. no. 5021312, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2025.3551427.
[28] H. Yang and X. Yang, “Self-supervised structured illumination
microscopy image denoising based on multiresolution analysis
resampling,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 74, 2025, Art. no.
5035711.
[29] Y . Quan, M. Chen, T. Pang, and H. Ji, “Self2self with dropout: Learning
self-supervised denoising from single image,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2020, pp. 1890–1898.
[30] C. Ge et al., “Self-supervised Self2Self denoising strategy for OCT
speckle reduction with a single noisy image,” Biomed. Opt. Exp.,
vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 1233–1252, 2024.
[31] M. Geng et al., “Triplet cross-fusion learning for unpaired image
denoising in optical coherence tomography,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 3357–3372, Nov. 2022.
[32] J. Sohl-Dickstein, E. Weiss, N. Maheswaranathan, and S. Ganguli, “Deep
unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2015, pp. 2256–2265.
[33] A. Q. Nichol and P. Dhariwal, “Improved denoising diﬀusion probabilis-
tic models,” in Proc. 38th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 139, M. Meila
and T. Zhang, Eds., Jul. 2021, pp. 8162–8171.
[34] Y . Song et al., “Score-based generative modeling through stochastic
diﬀerential equations,” 2020, arXiv:2011.13456.
[35] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diﬀusion probabilistic
models,” in Proc. NIPS, vol. 33, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2020,
pp. 6840–6851.
[36] F.-A. Croitoru, V . Hondru, R. T. Ionescu, and M. Shah, “Diﬀusion
models in vision: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 45, no. 9, pp. 10850–10869, Sep. 2023.
[37] X. Liu et al., “More control for free! Image synthesis with semantic
diﬀusion guidance,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. Appl. Comput.
Vis. (WACV), Jan. 2023, pp. 289–299.
[38] C. Saharia, J. Ho, W. Chan, T. Salimans, D. J. Fleet, and M. Norouzi,
“Image super-resolution via iterative reﬁnement,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 4713–4726, Apr. 2023.
[39] T. Liu et al., “CriDiﬀ: Criss-cross injection diﬀusion framework via
generative pre-train for prostate segmentation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Med.
Image Comput. Comput. Assist. Intervent, 2024, pp. 102–112.
[40] G. Daras, A. G. Dimakis, and C. Daskalakis, “Consistent diﬀusion meets
tweedie: Training exact ambient diﬀusion models with noisy data,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2024, pp. 10091–10108.
[41] P. Liu, H. Zhang, K. Zhang, L. Lin, and W. Zuo, “Multi-level wavelet-
CNN for image restoration,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2018, pp. 886–88609.
[42] J. Xin, J. Li, X. Jiang, N. Wang, H. Huang, and X. Gao, “Wavelet-based
dual recursive network for image super-resolution,” IEEE Trans. Neural
Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 707–720, Feb. 2022.
[43] J. Li, B. Cheng, Y . Chen, G. Gao, J. Shi, and T. Zeng, “EWT: Eﬃcient
wavelet-transformer for single image denoising,” Neural Netw., vol. 177,
Sep. 2024, Art. no. 106378.
[44] A. V . D. Oord, Y . Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
contrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv:1807.03748.
[45] D. Kermany, K. Zhang, and M. Goldbaum, “Labeled optical coherence
tomography (OCT) and chest X-ray images for classiﬁcation,” Mendeley
Data, V2, 2018, doi: 10.17632/rscbjbr9sj.2.
[46] L. Fang, S. Li, Q. Nie, J. A. Izatt, C. A. Toth, and S. Farsiu, “Sparsity
based denoising of spectral domain optical coherence tomography
images,” Biomed. Opt. Exp., vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 927–942, 2012.
[47] L. Fang et al., “Fast acquisition and reconstruction of optical coherence
tomography images via sparse representation,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 2034–2049, Nov. 2013.
[48] K. Zhang, W. Zuo, Y . Chen, D. Meng, and L. Zhang, “Beyond a
Gaussian denoiser: Residual learning of deep CNN for image denoising,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 3142–3155, Jul. 2017.
[49] D. Hu, Y . K. Tao, and I. Oguz, “Unsupervised denoising of retinal OCT
with diﬀusion probabilistic model,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 12032, pp. 25–34,
Apr. 2022.
[50] Y . Huang et al., “Simultaneous denoising and super-resolution of optical
coherence tomography images based on generative adversarial network,”
Opt. Exp., vol. 27, no. 9, pp. 12289–12307, 2019.
[51] Y . Xu, G. Wu, Z. Yuan, X. Li, D. Yang, and Y . Liang, “Deep learning
generalization study on optical coherence tomography image denoising,”
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 70, no. 14, Jul. 2025, Art. no. 145006.
[52] H. G. Li et al., “A new discrete wavelet transform fast algorithm
with rational dilation factor,” Int. J. Wavelets Multi., vol. 6, no. 4,
pp. 609–616, 2008.
Authorized licensed use limited to: China Jiliang University. Downloaded on May 10,2026 at 01:15:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
